+++
layout = "post"
title = "Coroutines for Rust"
date: 2011-12-06 08:01
comments: true
categories = ["Rust"]
+++

I have been thinking about unique closures, one of the last blocker items
for the Rust 0.1 release.  The original idea of a unique closure was
that it should be a closure that can only access uniquely owned state,
and which can therefore be sent to other tasks.  However, I've come to
have my doubts about this idea.  In particular, a unique closure, like
any closure, is a function, and can therefore be invoked many times:
but this imposes some limits on what such a closure can safely do.

As an example, a closure that brings in a unique pointer cannot move
it anywhere else (it could safely *swap* the pointer): if it did do
the move, what would happen the next time the closure was called? You
can't move the same variable twice. 

#### Procedures

Therefore I've been thining about introducing the notion of
*procedures*.  A procedure is basically a one-shot closure.
The user would create a coroutine using the keyword `proc`:

    let p = ~proc(f: uint) {
        log_err f;
    };

The result of this `proc` expression would be `proc::t<uint>`.  As you
can see, procedures do not have function type and cannot be called
like other functions.  They can accept arguments whose value will be
provided when the function is called: if there are multiple arguments,
they are packaged up into a tuple type.  If no arguments are
specified, the `()` may be omitted altogether (e.g., just `proc
{...}`).

> *As an aside:* this approach cannot accomodate modes. But I want to
> make those less vital.

Invoking a procedure is done by the `proc::call()` function:

    proc_call(p, 3u);
    
`proc::call()` takes the the procedure and the argument to the
procedure and executes it.  The definition of `proc::call()` is
as follows:

    fn proc_call<A>(-p: ~proc::t<A>, a: A)
    
#### Capture clauses in procedures

By default, procedures can only access upvars from the environment
that are [implicitly copyable](/rust/no-implicit-copies/).  However,
using a capture clause, procedures can copy or move other upvars
into scope:

    fn xfer(x: ~T) {
        let p = ~proc[move x]() {
            // x is accessible here.  It can be 
            // moved, copied, whatever.
        }
        // x is inaccessible here!
    }

#### Procedures as building blocks

One of the design goals for unique closures was to support task
libraries.  I believe procedures can satisfy this requirement.  For
example, suppose we wanted to have a task library that implicitly
created a channel of type any for every task:

    fn spawn_chan_task<A>(-p: ~proc::t<(chan<any>)>) {
        let c: chan::t<any> = /* create channel */;
        spawn proc[move p, c] {
            proc::call(p, c);
        };
    }
    
That example is surely wrong in every particular as I am not that
familiar with the chan API and don't feel like looking it up.  But
hopefully you get the idea: you can create a channel and then invoke
the procedure, passing it the channel.  Using `spawn_chan_task()` would then
be something like:

    spawn_chan_task proc(c: chan<any>) {
        ...
    }
    
#### Convenient syntax

The proc keyword should allow procedures to be passed as argument much
like blocks, in other words without parentheses.  There is a bit of
confusion because `proc` doubles as a module.  I'm OK with that but
others may not be.

#### Generalizing procedures: coroutines

Procedures are actually a simplification of full-fledged *coroutines*
(a.k.a., *iterators*, *delimited continuations*, and many other
names).  The main difference is that, whereas a procedure executes
once, a coroutine can *yield* an arbitrary number of times back to its
creator.  I originally wanted to implement full-fledged coroutines.
The design is similar: the `proc` keyword is replaced by `coro`.  Many
other aspects remain the same.  I am still more-or-less in favor of
this idea, but there are certain complications: primarily, when can
yields occur and how do you type them?

The simplest approach is probably to have the yield occur only in the
coroutine body.  So you can then write `put x` (to use the traditional
Rust keyword).  If you want to delegate to another coroutine, you can
write `coro::put_all()` which expects a coroutine as argument.  

The cool thing about coroutines is that they separate out *context
switching* from *parallelism*.  They would provide us with a path to
implement iterators, a feature we used to have, and also simplify the
inversion of control problem that infects things like lexers and
parsers.  

The downside is that they are a bit more verbose than procedures,
because they need a type like `coro::t<A,Y>` where `A` is the argument
type and `Y` is the yield type.  They are also more complex to
implement, and they may not be fast enough to *really* use for
iteration anyhow (though they ought to be; switching stacks is pretty
cheap).

#### The ugly stuff

There are some challenges.  To be safely sent to another task,
procedures need to only close over sendable state.  But they are kind
of useful in their own right---particularly if we do full-fledged
coroutines.  Also, one thing that might be useful to close over are
functions if not closures.  Not to mention that Rust has too many
function types as is.  So I want to think about this a bit and see
what can be done to simplify things.
